# 1	General description and introduction to how Decidim operates

Decidim [[http://decidim.org](http://decidim.org)], from the Catalan for "let's decide", is a digital infrastructure for participatory democracy, built entirely and collaboratively as free software. More specifically, Decidim is a web environment (a *framework*) produced in *Ruby on Rails* that allows users to create and configure a website platform or portal, to be used in the form of a social network, for democratic participation. The portal allows any organisation (local city council, association, university, NGO, neighbourhood or cooperative) to create mass processes for strategic planning, participatory budgeting, collaborative regulatory design, urban spaces and elections. It also enables the organisation of in-person meetings, meeting invites, registrations, the publication of minutes, the structuring of government bodies or assemblies, the convening of consultations, referendums or channelling citizen or member initiatives to impact different decision making processes.

To understand in detail how Decidim operates, a distinction must be made between participatory *spaces* and *components* (see Figure 1).

* **Participatory spaces.** This is the framework that defines the manner in which participation will be carried out, the *channels* or media through which citizens or members of an organisation can process requests or coordinate proposals and make decisions. *Initiatives*, *Processes*, *Assemblies *and* Consultations *are all participatory spaces. Specific examples of each of these include: a citizen initiative for directly changing a regulation (*Initiative*); a general assembly or workers’ council (*Assembly*); participatory budgets; an electoral process or a strategic planning process (*Processes*); a referendum or call to vote Yes or No to a specific proposal (*Consultation*).

* **Participatory components.** These are the participatory *mechanisms* that allow interaction between the platform's users and each of the participatory spaces. The following are participatory components: *meetings, conferences, incubators, proposals, participatory texts, surveys, discussions and debates, results, monitoring, votes, pages, blogs, observations, newsletters *and *search engines*.

Users of the platform (participants) interact through participatory mechanisms known as *components* which provide specific functions for the various participatory *spaces*. In other words, participatory *spaces* such as *Initiatives*, *Assemblies*, *Processes* and *Consultations* have components at their disposal which work together as participatory mechanisms. The more notable components include in-person *meetings*, *surveys*, *proposals*, *votes,* *results monitoring* and *comments*. So, for example, the various stages of a specific participatory process (such as the preparation of participatory budgets) can incorporate the possibility of convening and capturing the results of in-person meetings with citizens, it can include a survey, as well as the possibility of making proposals. After a period of commentary, discussions and debates, the voting component can be activated to decide on projects for a budget-expenditure system, an assessment survey can then be launched, followed by the activation of the monitoring component for the implementation of the projects selected.

Figure 1.* Summary diagram of Decidim showing a combination of components in participatory spaces. The Vote* component allows a variety of voting systems, expressions of support or allegiance for a proposal.*

**Processes** is a space that permits a user to create, activate/deactivate and manage various participatory processes, linking them together at different stages in which all of the components can be incorporated. **Assemblies** is a space which offers a user the possibility of defining bodies or groups that meet up periodically, detailing their composition, listing their meetings with geo-location and taking part in them (attending if the seating capacity and nature of the assembly so permits, adding items to the agenda or commenting on the proposals and decisions taken by that body). **Initiatives** is a space that allows a user to collaboratively create initiatives, define their trajectory and aims, gather support , discuss, debate and disseminate initiatives and define meeting points where signatures can be collected from attendees. **Consultations** is a space that makes it possible to coordinate referendums , trigger discussions and debates, and is connected to a secure e-voting system where results can be published.

As for the components, the proposal-**incubator** facilitates the collaborative proposal-making process as well as the monitoring and control of changes. The **proposals** component allows a user to create an official proposal with geo-location tracking, upload documents and browse and filter proposals. The **results** component is used to turn proposals into results and give official responses to their acceptance or rejection. The **monitoring** component offers the possibility of subdividing results into projects, defining and applying progress statuses in their implementation and displaying the extent of the results’ implementation. The **surveys** component can be used to design and publish surveys and display and download their results. The **comments **component enables users to add comments, vote on them, respond to and receive notifications about responses. The **participatory texts** component can be used to divide text documents into proposals or results and, vice versa, or to compose and display a unified text based on a collection of proposals or results. The **votes **component offers users the possibility of activating different voting systems on the proposals: unlimited, limited, weighted, cost-based directing voting etc. The **pages **component is used to create informative pages with rich text, pictures and videos. The **blog** component allows a user to create, categorise and display news chronologically. The **in-person meetings **component offers users the opportunity to convene meetings, determine the place and time, register and monitor attendees, define the structure and content of the appointment or in-person meeting, as well as publish the minutes, proposals and their results. The **conference** component allows users to create a website for a conference by joining up a series of small appointments in person (chats, workshops etc.), putting together a programme and managing attendees. The **newsletter** component is used to send emails to everyone registered within the platform or, more selectively, to those who participate in a specific space (NOTE:  Not all of the functional components described here correspond one by one to the components of Decidim's architecture. For example, there is currently no vote component as such, as votes belong to the proposal component which can be activated or deactivated from the administration panel. The same can be said of the results component and the results-monitoring component. We have opted to make a functional component distinction given that decidim's architecture can vary in this respect over the coming months.).

The users who participate in Decidim can be grouped into three different categories:

* **Visitors.** View: access to all of the platform's content without having to register.

* **Registered members.** Can contribute: by creating a user name, password and email account (or account for several social networks). Can add comments, create proposals, send messages and follow the platform's participants or elements and receive notifications.

* **Verified members**. These users enjoy a higher level of participation. They may be accredited as a member of an organisation, citizen of a municipality, or belong to a decision-making community (an association, community, collective etc.), and once verified can register for in-person meetings , support proposals, sign initiatives and vote in consultations.

They can register on a **personal** or **collective** basis (associations, organisations etc.,) and user groups can be created that express themselves collectively or individually. Individual or group participants may configure/change their notification preferences.

Each level of a participatory space (e.g. a participatory process) is situated within an **area** (territorial and/or sectoral) and defined by a series of **categories** and subcategories (e.g. topics) which only affect that space. **Labels** can also be used and there is also a general or specific search engine within the different spaces.

Unlike other existing platforms, Decidim’s architecture is **modular,** **scalable**, easy to **configure** and **integrated** with other tools or apps (data analysis, maps etc.). The platform has been designed in such a way that processes, assemblies and mechanisms can be set up easily and deployed from an administration panel, where no knowledge of programming is required to install, configure and activate it. The components (participatory components) that are integrated are independent from each other and can be developed, activated and deactivated independently.

Below, you may consult a detailed list of Decidim's functions and the dates when developmental improvements and new functions are expected (subject matter of the public procurement in progress for 2017-2018). The dates are for guidance purposes and are given with the year and quartile in which the function is expected. So, for example, "2018Q1" means the first quartile (quarter) of 2018, that is, its function is expected for January, February or March 2018. Where a function has no contractual date defined but is found in a period that covers more than one quartile it will be expressed as follows: “2018Q1-3” by stating that the function will be available at any time between the first and third quarter of 2018. The institution that will finance and contract the new functions is also mentioned: BCC (Barcelona City Council) and GenCat (Generalitat of Catalonia). Specifications, (Batch 1 type, etc.) after the financial institution, refer to the batches and components of the function of the public contract (NOTE:  The technical specifications which outline decidim's new functions can be found and downloaded from the following link: https://contractaciopublica.gencat.cat/ecofin_pscp/AppJava/ca_ES/notice.pscp?idDoc=24253271&reqCode=viewCn ).
